
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dry Eye | National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Skip to content
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 Research Today… Vision Tomorrow 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research and Training 
 
 
 
 
 
   Research and Training 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunity for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Labs and Branches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Training Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Research Events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grants and Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
   Grants and Funding 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunities for you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Priorities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to Apply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy and Compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 
 
 
   Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Get healthy vision tips, learn about vision rehabilitation, read about common and uncommon eye conditions, and find clinical trial opportunities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healthy Vision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Rehabilitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About NEI 
 
 
 
 
 
   About NEI 
 
 
 Read our mission, see our impact, and help us spread the word about eye health.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Mission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Education and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
  Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search the site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
                  Dry Eye
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Print this Page 
 
 
 
 Dry Eye 
 
 
 
 
 On this page: 
 Symptoms 
 Risk 
 Causes 
 Diagnosis 
 Treatment 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At a glance: Dry Eye 
 
 Symptoms: 
 Burning, dry or scratchy feeling, blurry vision, red eyes 
 
 
 Diagnosis: 
 Dilated eye exam, measuring amount and thickness of tears 
 
 
 Treatment: 
 Medicine (usually eye drops), lifestyle changes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What is dry eye?
            

     
 
 Dry eye happens when your eyes don’t make enough tears to stay wet, or when your tears don’t work correctly. This can make your eyes feel uncomfortable, and in some cases it can also cause vision problems. Dry eye is common — it affects millions of Americans every year. The good news is that if you have dry eye, there are lots of things you can do to keep your eyes healthy and stay comfortable. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the symptoms of dry eye?
            

     
 
 Dry eye can cause: A scratchy feeling, like there’s something in your eye Stinging or burning feelings in your eye Red eyes Sensitivity to light Blurry vision 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Am I at risk for dry eye?
            

     
 
 Anyone can get dry eye, but you might be more likely to have dry eye if you: Are age 50 or older Are female Wear contact lenses Don’t get enough vitamin A (found in foods like carrots, broccoli, and liver) or omega-3 fatty acids (found in fish, walnuts, and vegetable oils) Have certain autoimmune conditions, like lupus or Sjögren syndrome 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What causes dry eye?
            

     
 
 Normally, glands above your eyes make tears that keep your eyes wet. Dry eye happens when your tears don’t do their job. This could mean: Your glands don’t make enough tears to keep your eyes wet Your tears dry up too fast Your tears just don’t work well enough to keep your eyes wet 
 
 
 Learn more about the causes of dry eye 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How will my eye doctor check for dry eye?
            

     
 
 Your doctor can check for dry eye as part of a comprehensive dilated eye exam. The exam is simple and painless — your doctor will give you some eye drops to dilate (widen) your pupil and then check your eyes for dry eye and other eye problems. 
 
 
 Learn what to expect from a comprehensive dilated eye exam 
 
 
 Be sure to tell your doctor if you think you might have dry eye. To find out if you have dry eye, your doctor might check: The amount of tears your eyes make How long it takes for your tears to dry up The structure of your eyelids 
 
 
 Learn more about tests for dry eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Did you know?
            

     
 
 
 
 
 
 Dry eye is common — nearly 16.4 million Americans have dry eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 Dry eye can happen if you spend a lot of time looking at your computer, tablet, or smart phone 
 
 
 
 
 
 If severe dry eye isn’t treated, it can sometimes damage your cornea, the clear outer layer at the front of your eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What’s the treatment for dry eye?
            

     
 
 Treatment for dry eye usually depends on what’s causing your symptoms. There are a few different types of treatment that can ease your symptoms and help keep your eyes healthy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Over-the-counter eye drops.  The most common treatment for mild dry eye is a type of eye drops called artificial tears. You can get these eye drops without a prescription. There are also over-the-counter moisturizing gels and ointments that may help your eyes feel better. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Prescription medicines.  If your dry eye is more serious, your eye doctor may give you a prescription for medicines called cyclosporine (Restasis) or lifitegrast (Xiidra). These medicines are both types of eye drops that can help your eyes make more tears. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lifestyle changes.  If something in your life or your environment is causing your dry eye, or making it worse, your doctor may suggest changes to help protect your eyes. For example, if a medicine you take for another health condition is causing dry eye, your doctor may also suggest that you try a different medicine. Your eyes may also feel better if you: Try to avoid smoke, wind, and air conditioning Use a humidifier to keep the air in your home from getting too dry Limit screen time and take breaks from staring at screens Wear wraparound sunglasses when you're outside Drink plenty of water — try for 8 to 10 glasses every day Get enough sleep — about 7 to 8 hours a night 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Tear duct plugs . If tears are draining too quickly from your eyes, your doctor may suggest putting special plugs (called punctal plugs) in your tear ducts (small holes in the inner corners of your eyes). These plugs can help keep your tears in your eyes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Surgery.  In some cases, dry eye can happen because your lower eyelids are too loose, causing tears to drain too quickly out of your eye. If this is the cause of your dry eye, your eye doctor may suggest surgery to fix your eyelids and help your tears stay on your eyes. This treatment is not very common. 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talk over your options with your doctor. If another health condition is causing your dry eye, treating that condition may improve your dry eye symptoms. Even if you have dry eye, there are lots of things you can do to help keep your eyes healthy. Remember these tips: Follow your doctor's instructions for using your eye drops (over-the-counter or prescription) Tell your doctor if dry eye is getting in the way of everyday activities 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What's the latest research on dry eye?
            

     
 
 Scientists are studying what causes dry eye and how we can treat it better. NEI also funds research on new treatment options. 
 
 
 Get the latest news on NEI-supported dry eye research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Dry Eye Resources
            

     
 
 Watch this video about dry eye Get flyers, booklets, and other resources to print or download 
 
 
 
 
 
 Last updated: August 6, 2025 
 
 Was this page helpful? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI-funded study reveals complex muscle control behind blinking and eyelid function 
 
 August 11, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Mount Sinai-led research team identifies underlying mechanisms of age-related dysfunction in glands crucial to eye function 
 
 February 25, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 OHSU researchers discover link between proteins in tears, pain after eye surgery 
 
 July 17, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read more Dry Eye news 
 
 
 
 
 Have a Question? 
 
 
 Information Specialists can answer your questions in English or Spanish. Phone 800-680-2578 301-496-5248 Email 2020@nei.nih.gov The National Eye Institute does not diagnose diseases, offer specific treatment recommendations, or provide physician referrals. Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to top 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quick Links Contact Us NEI en Español NIH.gov HHS.gov USA.gov Policies Accessibility Nondiscrimination Notice Privacy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Disclaimers Web Policies Vulnerability Disclosure For NEI Employees 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Intranet  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Emergency Information  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIH Staff Directory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 YouTube 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
