
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glaucoma | National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Skip to content
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 Research Today… Vision Tomorrow 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research and Training 
 
 
 
 
 
   Research and Training 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunity for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Labs and Branches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Training Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Research Events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grants and Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
   Grants and Funding 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunities for you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Priorities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to Apply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy and Compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 
 
 
   Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Get healthy vision tips, learn about vision rehabilitation, read about common and uncommon eye conditions, and find clinical trial opportunities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healthy Vision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Rehabilitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About NEI 
 
 
 
 
 
   About NEI 
 
 
 Read our mission, see our impact, and help us spread the word about eye health.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Mission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Education and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
  Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search the site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
                  Glaucoma
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Print this Page 
 
 
 
 Glaucoma 
 
 
 
 
 On this page: 
 Types 
 Symptoms 
 Risk 
 Causes 
 Diagnosis 
 Treatment 
 Research 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At a glance: Glaucoma 
 
 Early Symptoms: 
 Often none 
 
 
 Later Symptoms: 
 Loss of side (peripheral) vision, blind spots, blindness 
 
 
 Diagnosis: 
 Dilated eye exam with visual field testing 
 
 
 Treatment: 
 Medicine (usually eye drops), laser treatment, surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What is glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Glaucoma is a group of eye diseases that can cause vision loss and blindness by damaging a nerve in the back of your eye called the optic nerve. The symptoms can start so slowly that you may not notice them. The only way to find out if you have glaucoma is to get a comprehensive dilated eye exam. There’s no cure for glaucoma, but early treatment can often stop the damage and protect your vision. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the types of glaucoma?
            

     
 
 There are many different types of glaucoma, but the most common type in the United States is called  open-angle glaucoma  — that’s what most people mean when they talk about glaucoma. Other types are less common, like angle-closure glaucoma and congenital glaucoma. 
 
 
 Learn more about the types of glaucoma 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the symptoms of glaucoma?
            

     
 
 At first, glaucoma doesn’t usually have any symptoms. That’s why half of people with glaucoma don’t even know they have it. Over time, you may slowly lose vision, usually starting with your side (peripheral) vision — especially the part of your vision that’s closest to your nose. Because it happens so slowly, many people can’t tell that their vision is changing at first. But as the disease gets worse, you may start to notice that you can’t see things off to the side anymore. Without treatment, glaucoma can eventually cause blindness. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Am I at risk for glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Anyone can get glaucoma, but some people are at higher risk. You’re at higher risk if you: Are over age 60, especially if you’re Hispanic/Latino Are African American and over age 40 Have a family history of glaucoma Talk with your doctor about your risk for glaucoma, and ask how often you need to get checked. If you’re at higher risk, you need to get a comprehensive dilated eye exam every 1 to 2 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Healthy Aging Month
            

     
 
 Getting older doesn’t have to mean losing your vision. While some vision changes are a normal part of getting older, vision loss related to eye diseases and conditions, such as glaucoma, can be prevented. Learn how healthy eye habits, like getting a regular dilated eye exam, can help keep your sight strong for years to come.​ 
 
 
 Protect your tomorrows 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    When to get help right away
            

     
 
 Angle-closure glaucoma can cause these sudden symptoms: Intense eye pain Upset stomach (nausea) Red eye Blurry vision If you have any of these symptoms, go to your doctor or an emergency room now. 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What causes glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Scientists aren’t sure what causes the most common types of glaucoma, but many people with glaucoma have high eye pressure — and treatments that lower eye pressure help to slow the disease. 
 
 
 Learn more about eye pressure and glaucoma 
 
 
 There’s no way to prevent glaucoma. That’s why eye exams are so important — so you and your doctor can find it before it affects your vision. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How will my eye doctor check for glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Eye doctors can check for glaucoma as part of a comprehensive dilated eye exam. The exam is simple and painless — your doctor will give you some eye drops to dilate (widen) your pupil and then check your eyes for glaucoma and other eye problems. The exam includes a visual field test to check your side vision. 
 
 
 Learn what to expect from a dilated eye exam  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Did you know?
            

     
 
 
 
 
 
 Glaucoma can happen in 1 eye or both eyes 
 
 
 
 
 
 Some people with high eye pressure don’t get glaucoma — and there’s a type of glaucoma that happens in people with normal eye pressure 
 
 
 
 
 
 Normal eye pressure varies by person — what’s normal for 1 person could be high for another 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What’s the treatment for glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Doctors use different types of treatment for glaucoma, including medicines (usually eye drops), laser treatment, and surgery. If you have glaucoma, it’s important to start treatment right away. Treatment won’t undo any damage to your vision, but it can stop it from getting worse. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Medicines.  Prescription eye drops are the most common treatment. They lower the pressure in your eye and prevent damage to your optic nerve. Learn more about glaucoma medicines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Laser treatment.  To lower your eye pressure, doctors can use lasers to help the fluid drain out of your eye. It’s a simple procedure that your doctor can do in the office. Learn more about laser treatment for glaucoma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Surgery.  If medicines and laser treatment don’t work, your doctor might suggest surgery. There are several different types of surgery that can help the fluid drain out of your eye. Learn more about glaucoma surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talk over your options with your doctor. While glaucoma is a serious disease, treatment works well. Remember these tips: If your doctor prescribes medicine, be sure to take it every day Tell your doctor if your treatment causes side effects See your doctor for regular check-ups If you’re having trouble with everyday activities because of your vision loss, ask your doctor about vision rehabilitation services or devices that could help Encourage family members to get checked for glaucoma, since it can run in families 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Featured Resource: Talk With Your Doctor About Glaucoma
            

     
 
 Do you have glaucoma? This guide makes it easy to talk with your doctor about your condition. It includes: Information about glaucoma Questions for the doctor A symptom tracker 
 
 
 Get the guide  
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What is the latest research on glaucoma?
            

     
 
 Scientists are studying what causes glaucoma and how we can find it earlier and treat it better. NEI also funds research on new treatment options. 
 
 
 Get the latest news on NEI-supported glaucoma research  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Glaucoma Resources
            

     
 
 See our materials for community health educators  
 
 
 Get flyers, booklets, and other resources to print or download  
 
 
 
 
 
 Last updated: November 26, 2025 
 
 Was this page helpful? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ‘Eye-on-a-chip’ reveals trigger for steroid-induced glaucoma 
 
 September 5, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Glaucoma monitoring lags in low-income and rural areas 
 
 March 18, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI study: New take on old marker of cell death 
 
 December 16, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read more Glaucoma news 
 
 
 
 
 Have a Question? 
 
 
 Information Specialists can answer your questions in English or Spanish. Phone 800-680-2578 301-496-5248 Email 2020@nei.nih.gov The National Eye Institute does not diagnose diseases, offer specific treatment recommendations, or provide physician referrals. Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to top 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quick Links Contact Us NEI en Español NIH.gov HHS.gov USA.gov Policies Accessibility Nondiscrimination Notice Privacy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Disclaimers Web Policies Vulnerability Disclosure For NEI Employees 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Intranet  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Emergency Information  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIH Staff Directory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 YouTube 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
