
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cataracts | National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Skip to content
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 Research Today… Vision Tomorrow 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research and Training 
 
 
 
 
 
   Research and Training 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunity for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Labs and Branches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Training Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Research Events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grants and Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
   Grants and Funding 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunities for you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Priorities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to Apply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy and Compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 
 
 
   Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Get healthy vision tips, learn about vision rehabilitation, read about common and uncommon eye conditions, and find clinical trial opportunities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healthy Vision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Rehabilitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About NEI 
 
 
 
 
 
   About NEI 
 
 
 Read our mission, see our impact, and help us spread the word about eye health.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Mission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Education and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
  Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search the site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
                  Cataracts
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Print this Page 
 
 
 
 Cataracts 
 
 
 
 
 On this page: 
 Types 
 Symptoms 
 Risk 
 Causes 
 Prevention 
 Diagnosis 
 Treatment 
 Research 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At a glance: Cataracts 
 
 Early Symptoms: 
 None 
 
 
 Later Symptoms: 
 Blurry vision, colors that seem faded, sensitivity to light, trouble seeing at night, double vision 
 
 
 Diagnosis: 
 Dilated eye exam 
 
 
 Treatment: 
 Surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are cataracts?
            

     
 
 A cataract is a cloudy area in the lens of your eye (the clear part of the eye that helps to focus light). Cataracts are very common as you get older. In fact, more than half of all Americans age 80 or older either have cataracts or have had surgery to get rid of cataracts. At first, you may not notice that you have a cataract. But over time, cataracts can make your vision blurry, hazy, or less colorful. You may have trouble reading or doing other everyday activities. Over time, cataracts can lead to vision loss. The good news is that surgery can get rid of cataracts. Cataract surgery is safe and corrects vision problems caused by cataracts . 
 
 
 Explore our interactive eye graphic to see how cataracts work 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the types of cataracts?
            

     
 
 Most cataracts are  related to age  — they happen because of normal changes in your eyes as you get older. But you can get cataracts for other reasons — like after an eye injury or after surgery for another eye problem (like  glaucoma ). No matter what type of cataract you have, you’ll need surgery to treat it. 
 
 
 Learn more about the types of cataracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Did you know?
            

     
 
 
 
 
 
 You can get cataracts in one eye or both eyes — but they can’t spread from one eye to the other 
 
 
 
 
 
 By age 80, most people either have cataracts or have had cataract surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cataract surgery is one of the most common operations in the United States 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the symptoms of cataracts?
            

     
 
 You might not have any symptoms at first, when cataracts are mild. But as they grow, cataracts can cause changes in your vision. For example, you may notice that: Your vision is cloudy or blurry Colors look faded You can’t see well at night Lamps, sunlight, or headlights seem too bright You see a halo around lights You see double (this sometimes goes away as the cataract gets bigger) You have to change the prescription for your glasses or contact lenses often Talk with your eye doctor if you have any of these symptoms — they could also be signs of other eye problems. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Am I at risk for cataracts?
            

     
 
 Your risk for cataracts goes up as you get older. You’re also at higher risk if you: Have certain health problems, like diabetes Smoke Drink too much alcohol Have a family history of cataracts Have had an eye injury, eye surgery, or radiation treatment on your upper body Have spent a lot of time in the sun Take steroids — medicines used to treat some health problems, like arthritis or allergies If you’re worried you might be at risk for cataracts, talk with your doctor. Ask if there’s anything you can do to lower your risk. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What causes cataracts?
            

     
 
 Most cataracts happen because of normal changes in your eyes as you get older. When you’re young, the lens in your eye is clear. Around age 40, the proteins in the lens of your eye start to break down and clump together. This clump makes a cloudy area on your lens — known as a cataract. Over time, the cataract gets worse and makes more of your lens cloudy. 
 
 
 Learn more about what causes cataracts 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How can I prevent cataracts?
            

     
 
 You can take steps to protect your eyes from cataracts: Protect your eyes from the sun.  Wear sunglasses and a hat with a brim to block the sun. Protect your eyes from injury.  While doing activities like using power tools or playing certain sports, wear protective eyewear to protect your eyes from getting accidentally injured. Quit smoking.  If you’re ready to quit, call 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669) for free support. Make eye-healthy food choices.  Eat plenty of healthy foods — like fruits and vegetables, leafy greens, nuts, and whole grains. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How will my eye doctor check for cataracts?
            

     
 
 An eye doctor can check for cataracts as part of a dilated eye exam. If you’re age 60 or older, get a dilated eye exam every 1 to 2 years. The exam is simple and painless — your doctor will give you some eye drops to dilate (widen) your pupil and then check your eyes for cataracts and other eye problems. 
 
 
 Learn what to expect from a dilated eye exam 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What’s the treatment for cataracts?
            

     
 
 Surgery is the only way to get rid of a cataract, but you may not need to get surgery right away. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home treatment.  Early on, you may be able to make small changes to manage cataracts. You can do things like: Use brighter lights at home or work Wear anti-glare sunglasses Use magnifying lenses for reading and other activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 New glasses or contacts.  A new prescription for eyeglasses or contact lenses can help you see better with cataracts early on. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Surgery.  Your doctor might suggest surgery if your cataracts start getting in the way of everyday activities like reading, driving, or watching TV. During cataract surgery, the doctor removes the clouded lens and replaces it with a new, artificial lens (also called an intraocular lens, or IOL). This surgery is very safe, and 9 out of 10 people who get it can see better afterwards. Learn more about cataract surgery 
 
 
 
 
 
 Talk about your options with your eye doctor. Most people don’t need to rush into surgery. Waiting to have surgery usually won’t harm your eyes or make surgery more difficult later. Use these tips: Tell your doctor if cataracts are getting in the way of your everyday activities See your doctor for regular check-ups Ask your doctor about the benefits and risks of cataract surgery Encourage family members to get checked for cataracts since they can run in families 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What’s the latest research on cataracts?
            

     
 
 Scientists are studying what causes cataracts and how we can find them earlier and treat them better. NEI also funds research on new treatment options. 
 
 
 Get the latest news on NEI-supported cataracts research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Cataract Resources
            

     
 
 Get flyers, booklets, and other resources to print or download 
 
 
 
 
 
 Last updated: November 26, 2025 
 
 Was this page helpful? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 FAU lands $1.9 million NIH grant for novel way to treat degenerative disease 
 
 February 14, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI-led studies point to potential development of a cataract drug 
 
 September 18, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Study explains why the brain can robustly recognize images, even without color 
 
 May 23, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read more Cataracts news 
 
 
 
 
 Have a Question? 
 
 
 Information Specialists can answer your questions in English or Spanish. Phone 800-680-2578 301-496-5248 Email 2020@nei.nih.gov The National Eye Institute does not diagnose diseases, offer specific treatment recommendations, or provide physician referrals. Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to top 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quick Links Contact Us NEI en Español NIH.gov HHS.gov USA.gov Policies Accessibility Nondiscrimination Notice Privacy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Disclaimers Web Policies Vulnerability Disclosure For NEI Employees 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Intranet  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Emergency Information  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIH Staff Directory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 YouTube 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
