
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) | National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Skip to content
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 Research Today… Vision Tomorrow 
 
 
 
 
 Menu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research and Training 
 
 
 
 
 
   Research and Training 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunity for you. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Labs and Branches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Training Opportunities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Research Events 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grants and Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
   Grants and Funding 
 
 
 Explore the science that’s safeguarding our sight and find the right training opportunities for you.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research Priorities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Find Funding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 How to Apply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy and Compliance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 
 
 
   Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Get healthy vision tips, learn about vision rehabilitation, read about common and uncommon eye conditions, and find clinical trial opportunities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healthy Vision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Vision Rehabilitation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Clinical Trials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About NEI 
 
 
 
 
 
   About NEI 
 
 
 Read our mission, see our impact, and help us spread the word about eye health.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Mission 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Our Impact 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEI Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Education and Outreach 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 English 
 
 
  Español 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search the site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Home 
 
 
 Eye Health Information 
 
 
 Eye Conditions and Diseases 
 
 
                  Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD)
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Print this Page 
 
 
 
 Age-Related Macular Degeneration (AMD) 
 
 
 
 
 On this page: 
 Types and Stages 
 Symptoms 
 Risk 
 Prevention 
 Diagnosis 
 Treatment 
 Research 
 Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 At a glance: AMD 
 
 Early Symptoms: 
 None 
 
 
 Later Symptoms: 
 Loss of the central vision you need to see details straight ahead, blurry or wavy areas in your central vision 
 
 
 Diagnosis: 
 Dilated eye exam 
 
 
 Treatment: 
 Dietary supplements (vitamins and minerals), injections, photodynamic therapy (injections and laser treatment) 
 
 
 Clinical Trial: 
 Stem Cell Transplants for Dry AMD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What is AMD?
            

     
 
 Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is an eye disease that can blur your central vision. It happens when aging causes damage to the macula — the part of the eye that controls sharp, straight-ahead vision. The macula is part of the retina (the light-sensitive tissue at the back of the eye). AMD is a common condition — it’s a leading cause of vision loss for older adults. AMD doesn’t cause complete blindness, but losing your central vision can make it harder to see faces, read, drive, or do close-up work like cooking or fixing things around the house. AMD happens very slowly in some people and faster in others. If you have early AMD, you may not notice vision loss for a long time. That’s why it’s important to get regular eye exams to find out if you have AMD. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the types and stages of AMD?
            

     
 
 There are  2 types  of AMD: dry and wet. Most people with AMD have  dry AMD  (also called atrophic AMD). This is when the macula gets thinner with age. Dry AMD happens in  3 stages : early, intermediate, and late. It usually progresses slowly over several years. There’s no treatment for late dry AMD, but you can find ways to make the most of your remaining vision. And if you have late dry AMD in only 1 eye, you can take steps to protect your other eye. Wet AMD  (also called advanced neovascular AMD), is a less common type of late AMD that usually causes faster vision loss. Any stage of dry AMD can turn into wet AMD — but wet AMD is always late stage. It happens when abnormal blood vessels grow in the back of the eye and damage the macula. The good news is that treatment options are available for wet AMD. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What are the symptoms of AMD?
            

     
 
 The symptoms of AMD depend on the stage. Dry AMD happens in 3 stages: early, intermediate, and late. AMD is a progressive disease — that means symptoms usually get worse over time. Early dry AMD  doesn’t cause any symptoms. In  intermediate dry AMD , some people still have no symptoms. Others may notice mild symptoms, like mild blurriness in their central vision or trouble seeing in low lighting. In  late AMD (wet or dry type) , many people notice that straight lines start to look wavy or crooked. You may also notice a blurry area near the center of your vision. Over time, this blurry area may get bigger or you may see blank spots. Colors may also seem less bright than before, and you may have more trouble seeing in low lighting. Straight lines looking wavy is a warning sign for late AMD. If you notice this symptom, see your eye doctor right away. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Am I at risk for AMD?
            

     
 
 Your risk for AMD increases as you get older. People age 55 and older are more likely to have AMD. The risk for AMD is also higher for people who: Have a family history of AMD Are Caucasian Smoke If you’re at risk for AMD because of your age, family history, or other factors, it’s important to get regular eye exams. Ask your doctor how often you need to get eye exams. Early AMD doesn’t have any symptoms, so don’t wait for your vision to change! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Healthy Aging Month
            

     
 
 Getting older doesn’t have to mean losing your vision. While some vision changes are a normal part of getting older, vision loss related to eye diseases and conditions, such as AMD, can be prevented. Learn how healthy eye habits, like getting a regular dilated eye exam, can help keep your sight strong for years to come.​ 
 
 
 Protect your tomorrows 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How can I lower my risk for AMD?
            

     
 
 Research shows that you may be able to lower your risk of AMD (or slow vision loss from AMD) by making these healthy choices: Quit smoking — or don’t start Get regular physical activity Maintain healthy blood pressure and cholesterol levels Eat healthy foods, including leafy green vegetables and fish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Did you know?
            

     
 
 
 
 
 
 AMD is very common — 11 million people in the United States have it 
 
 
 
 
 
 Late AMD can happen in 1 or both eyes 
 
 
 
 
 
 Having late AMD in 1 eye puts you at higher risk of developing late AMD in your other eye 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How will my eye doctor check for AMD?
            

     
 
 Eye doctors can check for AMD as part of a comprehensive dilated eye exam. The exam is simple and painless — your doctor will give you some eye drops to dilate (widen) your pupil and then check your eyes for AMD and other eye problems. 
 
 
 Learn what to expect from a dilated eye exam 
 
 
 Your doctor may also recommend doing a test called optical coherence tomography (OCT). In an OCT test, your eye doctor will take pictures f the inside of your eye with a special machine. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What’s the treatment for AMD?
            

     
 
 Treatment for AMD depends on the stage and type. There’s currently no treatment for early AMD, so your eye doctor will probably just keep track of how your eyes are doing with regular eye exams. Eating healthy, getting regular exercise, and quitting smoking can also help. If you have intermediate AMD in 1 or both eyes, special dietary supplements (vitamins and minerals) may be able to stop it from turning into late AMD. If you have late AMD in only 1 eye, these supplements may slow down AMD in your other eye. 
 
 
 Learn more about supplements for AMD 
 
 
 If you have wet AMD, there are other treatments that may be able to stop further vision loss: Medicines called anti-VEGF drugs that the doctor injects in your eye Photodynamic therapy (PDT), a combination of injections and laser treatment 
 
 
 Learn more about treatments for wet AMD 
 
 
 There’s currently no treatment for late dry AMD — but researchers are hard at work looking for treatment options. And you can get support to help you live with vision loss from AMD. 
 
 
 
 
      



                    How do I live with vision loss from AMD?
            

     
 
 Not everyone with AMD develops late AMD or gets it in both eyes. But if you do, living with vision loss from AMD can be challenging. Having low vision means that even with glasses, contact lenses, medicine, or surgery, your vision loss makes it hard to do everyday tasks. The good news is, there are things that can help — like low vision devices and vision rehab services. Vision rehab can help you learn the skills you need to stay independent and active with low vision. 
 
 
 Learn more about low vision 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    Featured Resource: Talk with Your Doctor About Age-Related Macular Degeneration
            

     
 
 Do you have AMD? This guide makes it easy to talk with your doctor about what this means. It includes: Information about AMD Questions for the doctor A symptom tracker 
 
 
 Get the guide 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    What's the latest research on AMD?
            

     
 
 Scientists are studying what causes AMD and how we can treat it better. 
 
 
 One NEI research team found a way to treat dry AMD in animals using stem cells.  Researchers are now testing whether this treatment is safe for people . This research could lead to a treatment for dry AMD in the future.  Learn how to participate in a clinical trial on stem cells . 
 
 
 Get the latest news on NEI-supported AMD research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      



                    AMD Resources
            

     
 
 Find statistics and data on AMD in the United States Check out our library of AMD videos Get flyers, booklets, and other resources to print or download 
 
 
 
 
 
 Last updated: June 22, 2021 
 
 Was this page helpful? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research News 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Strategy to prevent age-related macular degeneration identified 
 
 June 25, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIH scientists test in an animal model a surgical technique to improve cell therapy for dry AMD 
 
 May 22, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIH researchers supercharge ordinary clinical device to get a better look at the back of the eye 
 
 April 22, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Read more Age-Related Macular Degeneration news 
 
 
 
 
 Have a Question? 
 
 
 Information Specialists can answer your questions in English or Spanish. Phone 800-680-2578 301-496-5248 Email 2020@nei.nih.gov The National Eye Institute does not diagnose diseases, offer specific treatment recommendations, or provide physician referrals. Contact Us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to top 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Quick Links Contact Us NEI en Español NIH.gov HHS.gov USA.gov Policies Accessibility Nondiscrimination Notice Privacy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Disclaimers Web Policies Vulnerability Disclosure For NEI Employees 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Intranet  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Emergency Information  
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIH Staff Directory  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 National Eye Institute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LinkedIn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Facebook 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 YouTube 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
